Invariably,  when two seats are open next to each other, the person will take the outside seat,  effectively leaving the seat by the window ‘stranded’ cutting off access to anyone else who comes along.   Would seem to contravene basic principles of bus etiquette. 
Then the phenomenon of people in a two seat configuration sitting on the outside seat leaving the seat by the window empty.    This appears to be the height of selfishness to someone who has been taught that it is polite to make room for someone else.   
Since it is tolerated,  no one ever says anything,  I delved into the reasons that might explain. 
I polled acquaintances, colleagues etc. and the responses can be grouped into a number of distinct categories.
The reasons hypothesized range from the Socio-Cultural to the Practical and the Psychological.   The more practical and arguably most selfish is that people want to make it as easy as possible for themselves when they have to get off at a stop and don’t have to bother with climbing over or around someone else.     Also, you can avoid the exposure to direct sun and the heat from sitting next to the window, especially in Summer. 
The socio-cultural is that people are used to stepping over each other and working in tight spaces so this isn’t perceived as much of an inconveniene or  imposition as it might be elsewhere.    Psychological ?).     \
One time a man sitting in the outside seat suddenly reached up an began tugging on my sleeve while motioning to the seat.  My inclination was to refuse because I don’t like the inconvenience to myself or the other person if I have to climb over them.  But in this case, much to my surprise, he moved next to the window and made the prized outside seat available for my use. 
Another element of bus etiquette concerns how people get off the bus.  This is critical because of the number of people crowded onto the bus at rush hour. 
People shifting places by the door.  Like the interlocking pieces in a Rubik’s cube.   A pas de deux.  Especially complex and challenging on a full bus.   Accompanied by the phrase ‘huan yi xia’.   Hard to understand what the urgency is and the need to disrupt and inconvenience so many people especially at rush hour.   Triple jeopardy situation when you’re holding a briefcase, trying to pass a card to the front and someone is pushing from behind as they maneuver towards the door.  when things will naturally loosen up and holes open  as the doors open at a stop and people start to get off.  There is more than enough time to get off as long as your standing within feet of the doors.   But these people need to get right next to the doors.
Finally, there is an appropriate way to engage the driver.  Engaging the driver in conversation especially if its about his driving skills and habit.   Don’t cricize directly but rather preface your comment as a ‘small suggestion’   (‘xiao jianyi)
